Blog/_pages/legal.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: legal notice
permalink: /legal/
subtitle:
profile:
  align:
  image: snv-logo.jpg
  image_circular: false # crops the image to make it circular
  address:

news: true  # includes a list of news items
latest_posts: false  # includes a list of the newest posts
selected_papers: false # includes a list of papers marked as "selected={true}"
social: false  # includes social icons at the bottom of the page
nav: false
---


## Legal notice

Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e. V.
Association headquartered in Berlin

Court of registry: District Court Berlin-Charlottenburg, VR 27918 B

Management Board: Anna Wohlfarth

### Contact

Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e.V.
Eberstraße 2
D-10117 Berlin

T. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 80
F. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 97

E-Mail: [info@stiftung-nv.de](mailto:info@stiftung-nv.de)
Web: [www.stiftung-nv.de](www.stiftung-nv.de)

## Data Protection Policy

Below, we will inform you about how we collect and process your personal data, e.g. name, address, e-mail addresses, user behavior, which you - knowingly or unknowingly - provide when you visit our website and, if applicable, how long the data is stored, as well as the rights that you, as data subject, have.

If we use contracted service providers for individual functions of our offer or would like to use your data for advertising purposes, we will inform you in detail about the respective processes below. In doing so, we will also state the defined criteria for the storage period.

### 1. Controller  

The party responsible for the processing of personal data during your visit to our website according to Art. 4 No. 7 GDPR is 

Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e. V.
Ebertstraße 2
D-10117 Berlin

T. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 80
F. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 97
e-mail: info@stiftung-nv.de

 
### 2. Data protection officer

You can reach our data protection officer via [datenschutz@stiftung-nv.de](mailto:datenschutz@stiftung-nv.de).

### 3. Purpose, legal basis, and duration of data processing 

#### 3.1 Access data/ Server log files
 
We do not store any logs for this server nor do we use third party services within the website.

Our [hoster](https://www.digitalocean.com/) may collect log information on the networking level in accordance with their [privacy policy](https://www.digitalocean.com/legal/privacy-policy) and the [data processing agreement](https://www.digitalocean.com/legal/data-processing-agreement)

####  3.2  Get in contact 

If you send us inquiries, your message including the contact data you have provided will be stored and processed accordingly for processing and answering the inquiry as well as for follow-up questions. We do not share this data with third parties, unless this is necessary for the context of processing and responding to your contact request or if you have given us your consent to do so.

If you contact us in the course of an existing contractual relationship or contact us in advance for information about an offer, the data and information you provide will be processed for processing and responding to your contact request according to Art. 6 para. 1 sentence 1 lit. b GDPR. Moreover, for the protection of our legitimate interests according to Art. 6 para. 1 p. 1 lit. f GDPR for the proper response to customer/contact inquiries.

### 4. Data Subject Rights 

You have the following rights concerning the personal data concerning you:

    Right to information according to Art. 15 GDPR,
    Right to rectification according to Art. 16 GDPR,
    Right to erasure according to Art. 17 GDPR,
    Right to restriction of processing according to Art. 18 GDPR,
    Right to data portability according to Art. 20 GDPR.
    Right to object to the processing of your personal data according to Art. 21 GDPR.

Furthermore, you have the right to complain to a supervisory authority of your choice in accordance with Art. 77 (1) GDPR about the data processing taking place.

This includes the data protection supervisory authority responsible for us: 

Berlin’s Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information, T. +49 (0)30 13889-0, F. +49 (0)30 2155050, e-mail: mailbox@datenschutz-berlin.de

### 5. Automated decision-making/profiling

We do not use automated decision-making or profiling (an automated analysis of your personal circumstances).

Commit message:

updated privacy information as we now use goatcounter

Blog/_pages/legal.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: legal notice
permalink: /legal/
subtitle:
profile:
  align:
  image: snv-logo.jpg
  image_circular: false # crops the image to make it circular
  address:

news: true  # includes a list of news items
latest_posts: false  # includes a list of the newest posts
selected_papers: false # includes a list of papers marked as "selected={true}"
social: false  # includes social icons at the bottom of the page
nav: false
---


## Legal notice

Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e. V.
Association headquartered in Berlin

Court of registry: District Court Berlin-Charlottenburg, VR 27918 B

Management Board: Anna Wohlfarth

### Contact

Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e.V.
Eberstraße 2
D-10117 Berlin

T. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 80
F. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 97

E-Mail: [info@stiftung-nv.de](mailto:info@stiftung-nv.de)
Web: [www.stiftung-nv.de](www.stiftung-nv.de)

## Data Protection Policy

Below, we will inform you about how we collect and process your personal data, e.g. name, address, e-mail addresses, user behavior, which you - knowingly or unknowingly - provide when you visit our website and, if applicable, how long the data is stored, as well as the rights that you, as data subject, have.

If we use contracted service providers for individual functions of our offer or would like to use your data for advertising purposes, we will inform you in detail about the respective processes below. In doing so, we will also state the defined criteria for the storage period.

### 1. Controller  

The party responsible for the processing of personal data during your visit to our website according to Art. 4 No. 7 GDPR is 

Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e. V.
Ebertstraße 2
D-10117 Berlin

T. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 80
F. +49(0)30 81 45 03 78 97
e-mail: info@stiftung-nv.de

 
### 2. Data protection officer

You can reach our data protection officer via [datenschutz@stiftung-nv.de](mailto:datenschutz@stiftung-nv.de).

### 3. Purpose, legal basis, and duration of data processing 

#### 3.1 Access data/ Server log files
 
We store server logs for maintainance purposes for 7 days (Art 6 para 1 lit f) this includes data about the requested file, time, information about the user agent (browser) in combination with your IP address and - if enabled - the site that led you to our website (the referer). To better understand the usage of our website ((Art 6 para 1 lit f)) this data is aggregated locally to generate usage statistics with [goatcounter](https://www.goatcounter.com/).

Our [hoster](https://www.digitalocean.com/) collectw log information on the networking level in accordance with their [privacy policy](https://www.digitalocean.com/legal/privacy-policy) and the [data processing agreement](https://www.digitalocean.com/legal/data-processing-agreement)

####  3.2  Get in contact 

If you send us inquiries, your message including the contact data you have provided will be stored and processed accordingly for processing and answering the inquiry as well as for follow-up questions. We do not share this data with third parties, unless this is necessary for the context of processing and responding to your contact request or if you have given us your consent to do so.

If you contact us in the course of an existing contractual relationship or contact us in advance for information about an offer, the data and information you provide will be processed for processing and responding to your contact request according to Art. 6 para. 1 sentence 1 lit. b GDPR. Moreover, for the protection of our legitimate interests according to Art. 6 para. 1 p. 1 lit. f GDPR for the proper response to customer/contact inquiries.

### 4. Data Subject Rights 

You have the following rights concerning the personal data concerning you:

    Right to information according to Art. 15 GDPR,
    Right to rectification according to Art. 16 GDPR,
    Right to erasure according to Art. 17 GDPR,
    Right to restriction of processing according to Art. 18 GDPR,
    Right to data portability according to Art. 20 GDPR.
    Right to object to the processing of your personal data according to Art. 21 GDPR.

Furthermore, you have the right to complain to a supervisory authority of your choice in accordance with Art. 77 (1) GDPR about the data processing taking place.

This includes the data protection supervisory authority responsible for us: 

Berlin’s Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information, T. +49 (0)30 13889-0, F. +49 (0)30 2155050, e-mail: mailbox@datenschutz-berlin.de

### 5. Automated decision-making/profiling

We do not use automated decision-making or profiling (an automated analysis of your personal circumstances).
